---
title: "API Types"
date: "2025-07-05"
categories: [Worse Quality]
tags: [GraphQL, API]
---
# Introduction
I once heard really good analogy that will help us understand what an API is, imagine web application as restaurant. So to order food we have 3 parts, you as a client, kichen as a server, and finally waiter as an API, you can talk to kichen (server) to get food (services) through a waiter (API), to do this you would usually need a menu (API documentation) which would tell you what can you order from waiter.
### Types of API's
We have three main types of an API:
- REST
- GraphQL
- SOAP

RESTful api's have endpoint and you can retrieve information or edit it based on the path you are hitting, for example we could have path ```/v3/api/order```, and you would have aviable few endpoints like: ```/v3/api/order/food/<id>```, ```/v3/api/order/table/<number>``` etc. where values inside <> would be set by you.

GraphQL api's have single endpoint that doesn't change and you are retrieving information or editing it through: queries, mutations, and subscriptions. Queries are retrieving information from the server, mutations allows you to change data, and subscriptions inform you when data changed, they are used more rarely and usually communicate with you through web sockets.

SOAP APIs use a strict protocol based on XML and typically communicate through a fixed set of operations defined in a WSDL file. They can work over multiple transport methods like HTTP or SMTP, and each operation has a specific structure and expected input/output. SOAP messages are always wrapped in an XML envelope, and the format doesn’t change. They support built-in features like error handling, authentication, and security (WS-Security). Because of their reliability and formal structure, they’re often used in enterprise systems, even though they’re less common in modern web development.